In this video and the following
one, I'm going to be talking
about nested classes and their
different types and meanings.
A class defined within the body
of another class or type is
called a nested class in Java.
There's two types of nested classes.
A static nested class.
And a non-static nested class
also called an inner class.
And in terms of inner classes,
there's three types of inner classes.
An inner member class - this
type of class is considered a
member of the enclosing class.
I did discuss class members in
section 9 of the 1Z0-819 Part 1
course [SubClasses and SuperClasses
video] and I stated that a class can
have four types of members, [fields,
methods, classes, and interfaces].
And then a member is defined
as an attribute on a class
that is inherited by a subclass.
So that's an inner member class.
Secondly, a local inner class is
defined within a block of code,
usually the body of a method, and is
not a member of the enclosing class.
And thirdly, we've got an anonymous
class which is a special type of
local inner class that's declared and
instantiated in a single statement.
In an earlier video in this
section, I declared that static
was not a modifier that could be
used by an outer class, but here,
it is the distinctive modifier
to distinguish between the two
categories of nested classes.
So, let's explore a static nested
class and some code samples.
So, in the project Fundamentals
which I've got open on screen that
we're using in the previous video,
we need to create a new class.
So, I'm going to do that.
I'm going to open the project
pane and I’m going to create a new
class and I’m going to create it
in its own package called nest.
So it'll be nest.EnclosingClass.
You can see it's automatically
created the package statement for me.
Double-click, click that
and I’ll paste in some code.
This is the code snippet that
we're going to be working on.
Now, this code firstly consists
of a public class, EnclosingClass.
You can see the definition
there on line 11.
Now, this class has got a static
field, line 16 to be specific.
It's also got an instance
field on line 13.
We've got a static method
defined on line 19.
And that method actually invokes a
static method on the nested class.
We've also got an instance method
and that invokes an instance
method on the nested class through
an instance of the nested class.
We've got a static nested class as
well, as you can see there, line 33.
And that consists itself of a
static field, an instance field,
a static method, an instance
method, an enum, and an interface.
All right, and then we've got our test
class here called TestEnclosingClass.
And that's got a main method
which you can see there and
that demonstrates the following.
Firstly, referencing a static
field on a static nested class.
Referencing a static method
on a static nested class.
Referencing an enum on
a static nested class.
And finally, a local
variable declaration using
a nested class's interface.
All right, so if we run this now,
we can see the output below.
Right, so that works okay.
Let's repeat this main method
from a class in another package.
So what we want to do now
is create a new class…
not in a package, I'm going to
call this one static class example.
Now, I'm going to paste in
the code segment for this.
Noting that it's just the main method
here and that's almost identical to
the testing closing class, output or
code rather the main method there.
The difference is, if we go back
to it now, you can see that we're
importing nest.EnclosingClass.
So, if we run this code now in
our static class example,
the code compiles and executes perfectly
and that's because we've defined all
things public in the enclosing class.
You can see there that everything
that I've done has been marked public.
All right, so what this code is
demonstrating is that you can
access a static nested class and its
members from outside of the enclosing
class using a class reference.
And you can see, the class preferences
there on lines 15, 18, 21, and 24.
And again, when we ran it, we got
the identical output to when we ran
the main method in an EnclosingClass
or in our test class rather.
All right.
Let's make a change to
static class example now.
What we're going to do is
change the input statement.
You can see at the moment, it's
import nest.EnclosingClass.
Let's change that to the import nest.EnclosingClass.NestedStaticClass.
And you can see that's introduced
compiler errors in our code.
What I’m going to do is
replace those four snippets
of code there with a new one.
So, what I've done there is that
I've removed all references to
enclosing class as you can see there.
Now that I've done that, the
code is showing no errors.
And if we run this, it executes fine.
And interestingly, you can
change the input statement
to use a static import.
So we come up here and
just make that static.
And the code still executes.
All right, so moving back to our
EnclosingClass,
so I've demonstrated that you can create an instance of the NestedStaticClass in the
doSomething instance method. So, let's go back up
and have a look at that.
So you can see the code
there on line 29.
And we can actually do this from
the static class example as well.
So, I'm going to paste into code right
at the bottom of the main method.
You can see, we're creating an
instance of the static class there
and if we run this,
we get that
bottom line of output as well.
All right, so let's
end the video here.
In the next one, I want to start
talking about something that I
think is very important how you
cannot reference instance members
of the EnclosingClass in any
members of the StaticNestedClass.
Let's talk about that
in the next video.